---
title: Bases for Topologies
date: 2024-07-11T14:22:11-04:00
references: []
tags: [In_Progress]
---

# Motivation & Definition

Let $X$ be a set. To specify a {{< link file="topological_space" display="topology" type="references" >}} on $X$, one needs to give a complete description of the open sets. In practice, one only specifies a smaller collection (that nonetheless pins down all open sets). Two questions arise:
1. If $\mc{T}$ is a *given* topology on $X$, what subcollections $\mc{B}\subseteq\mc{T}$ completely specify $\mc{T}$?
2. What kinds of collections $\mc{B}\subseteq\pow(X)$ can specify *some* topology $\mc{T}$ on $X$?

In either case, we say that $\mc{T}$ is *generated by* $\mc{B}$.

<div class="space"></div>

## Generation of a Fixed Topology

Let $\mc{T}$ be a topology on $X$.

{{< env type="definition" >}}

A collection $\mc{B}\subseteq\mc{T}$ is a **basis for $\mc{T}$** if every open set $U\in\mc{T}$ is a union of sets in $\mc{B}$.

{{< /env >}}

Equivalently, $\mc{B}\subseteq\pow(X)$ is a basis for $\mc{T}$ iff for each $x\in X$, its neighborhood {{< link file="filter" display="filter" type="references" >}} $\mc{N}_x$ (of all sets $A\subseteq X$ such that $x\in U\subseteq A$ for some $U\in\mc{T}$) admits a {{< link file="filter" display="filter base" type="references" section="base" >}} in $\mc{B}$.

>{{< env type="proof" hide="true" >}}

If $\mc{B}\subseteq\mc{T}$ is a basis and $x\in X$, then $\l\\{V\in\mc{B}\st x\in V\r\\}$ is a filter base for $\mc{N}_x$. Conversely, let $U$ be open. Every $x\in U$ admits a filter base $\mc{B}_x\subseteq\mc{B}$, giving us for each $x\in U$ some $B_x\in\mc{B}_x\subseteq\mc{B}$ with $x\in B_x\subseteq U$, so that $U=\bigcup\_{x\in U}B_x$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

{{< /env >}}

Since all open sets $U\in\mc{T}$ are just unions of sets in $\mc{B}$, we call $\mc{B}$ the *basic open sets*.

<br>

&emsp;&emsp;Thus $\mc{T}$ is obtained from $\mc{B}$ by closing under unions. To further thin down the subcollection and obtain $\mc{T}$ by closing under finite intersections as well, we need:

{{< env type="definition" >}}

A collection $\mc{S}\subseteq\mc{T}$ is a **subbasis for $\mc{T}$** if every open set $U\in\mc{T}$ is a union of finite intersections of sets in $\mc{S}$.

{{< /env >}}

Note that $\mc{B}\_\mc{S}\coloneqq\l\\{\bigcap\_{i=1}^nU\_i\st U\_i\in\mc{S},n\in\N\r\\}$ is a basis for $\mc{T}$.

<div class="space"></div>

## Generation of Some Topology

For a subcollection $\mc{B}\subseteq\pow(X)$ to generate *some* topology on $X$, it certainly must not violate any of the axioms of a topology on $X$. Thus, we may consider different levels of generation, as follows.

{{< env type="definition" >}}

Let $X$ be a set.

{{< /env >}}

# Rigidity of Bases/Subbases

Many topological properties of $X$ can be detected by bases/subbases thereof.
