---
mathLink-blocks:
    sign: Existence of sign homomorphism
    non-solvable: $S_n$ is not solvable for $n\geq5$
    conjugation: Permutations are conjugate $\Leftrightarrow$ same cycle type
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 04/05/2023 14:13:26
References: #Ref/Lan02
Tags: #Type/Proposition #Topic/Group_Theory

Proved by: [[Lagrange's Theorem]], [[Simplicity of alternating group]]
References: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>
^conjugation

Specializations: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>
^non-solvable

``` ad-Proposition
title: Proposition.

Let $X\coloneqq\l\{1,\dots,n\r\}$ for some $n\in\N^+$ and consider the symmetric group $S_n\coloneqq\Sym\l(X\r)$. Then the following properties hold.
* (Generation). $\l|S_n\r|=n!$ and $S_n$ is generated by transpositions.
* (Cycles). Every $\sigma\in S_n$ decomposes into disjoint cycles, and disjoint cycles commute.
* (Conjugacy). Two partitions $\sigma,\rho\in S_n$ are conjugate iff they have the same cycle type; i.e. a partition $1\leq t_1\leq\cdots\leq t_r$ of $n$ where each $t_i$ is the length of the $i^\textrm{\it{th}}$ cycle $\sigma_i$ in the cycle decomposition $\sigma=\prod_{i=1}^r\sigma_i$.
* (Sign). There is a unique homomorphism $\epsilon:S_n\to\l\{\pm1\r\}$ such that $\epsilon\l(\tau\r)=-1$ for every transposition $\tau\in S_n$.
* (Non-solvability). If $n\geq5$, then $S_n$ is not solvable.

```
^sign

<i>Proof (generation).</i> Let $H$ be the stabilizer subgroup of $n$, so $H\iso S_{n-1}$. Then, for $1\leq i\leq n$, the elements $\sigma_i\in S_n$ such that $\sigma_i\!\l(n\r)=i$ lie in distinct cosets of $H$, so we have by Lagrange’s Theorem and induction that
$$\begin{equation}
    \l|S_n\r|=\l[S_n:H\r]\cdot\l|H\r|=n\l|H\r|=n\l(n-1\r)!=n!.
\end{equation}$$
To see that $S_n$ is generated by transpositions, take $\id\neq\sigma\in S_n$, so there are distinct $i,j\in X$ such that $\sigma\l(i\r)=j$. Consider the transposition $\tau\coloneqq\l(i\ j\r)$. Then $\tau\sigma$ leaves $i$ fixed, so $\tau\sigma$ can be identified with an element in $S_{n-1}$. By induction, $\tau\sigma$ is generated by transpositions in $S_{n-1}$, so we are done.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

---

<i>Proof (cycles).</i> Let $G\coloneqq\gen{\sigma}$ act on $X$, which partitions $X$ into disjoint orbits. Fix $i\in X$. Since $X$ is finite, its orbit is finite, say $Gi=\l\{i,\sigma\l(i\r),\sigma^2\!\l(i\r),\dots,\sigma^{r-1}\!\l(i\r)\r\}$ for some $r\in\N$. But orbits are disjoint, so $\sigma^r\!\l(i\r)\in G_i$ and hence $\sigma^r\!\l(i\r)=i$. Thus the orbit of $i$ forms a cycle $\l(i\ \sigma\l(i\r)\ \cdots\ \sigma^{r-1}\!\l(i\r)\r)$, and repeating this for all $X\comp Gi$ gives us the desired decomposition.
* Take disjoint cycles $\sigma_1\coloneqq\l(a_1\ \cdots\ a_r\r)$ and $\sigma_2\coloneqq\l(b_1\ \cdots\ b_s\r)$ in $S_n$. Then $\l(\sigma_2\circ\sigma_1\r)\l(a_i\r)=\sigma_1\l(a_i\r)=\l(\sigma_1\circ\sigma_2\r)\l(a_i\r)$ and similarly for $b_j$. Furthermore, both $\sigma_1\circ \sigma_2$ and $\sigma_2\circ\sigma_1$ fix all $c\neq a_i,b_j$, so they coincide.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

---

<i>Proof (conjugacy).</i> If $\sigma$ and $\rho$ is conjugate, then $\rho=\tau\sigma\tau^{-1}$ for some $\tau\in S_n$. Observe that if $\sigma\l(i\r)=j$, then $\rho\l(\tau\l(i\r)\r)=\tau\l(j\r)$. Thus if $\sigma_k\coloneqq\l(i_1\ \cdots\ i_t\r)$ is a cycle in the cycle decomposition $\prod_{k=1}^r\sigma_k$ of $\sigma$, then $\tau\sigma_k\tau^{-1}=\tau\l(i_1\ \cdots\ i_t\r)\tau^{-1}=\l(\tau\l(i_1\r)\ \cdots\ \tau\l(i_t\r)\r)$ is the corresponding cycle in the cycle decomposition of $\rho$ obtained by replacing each element $i$ by $\tau\l(i\r)$. Furthermore, since $\rho=\tau\sigma\tau^{-1}=\prod_{k=1}^r\tau\sigma_k\tau^{-1}$ is a product of disjoint cycles, we see that $\sigma$ and $\rho$ have the same cycle type. Conversely, if $\sigma$ and $\rho$ have the same cycle type, say with $\sigma=\prod_{k=1}^r\sigma_k=\prod_{k=1}^r\l(i_1^k\ \cdots\ i_{t_k}^k\r)$ and $\rho=\prod_{k=1}^r\rho_k=\prod_{k=1}^r\l(j_1^k\ \cdots\ j_{t_k}^k\r)$, then letting $\tau\in S_n$ be defined by $\tau\l(i_a^b\r)\coloneqq j_a^b$ makes $\rho=\tau\sigma\tau^{-1}$, as desired.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

---

<i>Proof (sign).</i> Consider the polynomial $\Delta\coloneqq\prod_{i<j}\l(x_i-x_j\r)$ and let $\sigma\in S_n$ act on $\Delta$ by $\sigma\l(\Delta\r)\coloneqq\prod_{i<j}\l(x_{\sigma\l(i\r)}-x_{\sigma\l(j\r)}\r)$. For all $i<j$, since the polynomial $\Delta$ contains a factor of $x_i-x_j$ and $\sigma$ is a permutation, we see that $\sigma\l(\Delta\r)$ contains exactly one of $x_i-x_j$ or $-\l(x_i-x_j\r)$. Collecting all the sign changes shows that $\sigma\l(\Delta\r)=\pm\Delta$ and we define $\epsilon\l(\sigma\r)$ to be the sign. Clearly if $\tau\in S_n$ is a transposition then $\epsilon\l(\tau\r)=-1$, and for all $\sigma_1,\sigma_2\in S_n$, we let $y_i\coloneqq x_{\sigma_2\l(i\r)}$ to see that
$$\begin{equation}
    \l(\sigma_2\circ\sigma_1\r)\Delta\l(x_1,\dots,x_n\r)=\Delta\l(x_{\l(\sigma_2\circ\sigma_1\r)\l(1\r)},\dots,x_{\l(\sigma_2\circ\sigma_1\r)\l(n\r)}\r)=\Delta\l(y_{\sigma_1\l(1\r)},\dots,y_{\sigma_1\l(n\r)}\r)=\epsilon\l(\sigma_1\r)\Delta\l(x_{\sigma_2\l(1\r)},\dots,x_{\sigma_2\l(n\r)}\r)=\epsilon\l(\sigma_1\r)\epsilon\l(\sigma_2\r)\Delta\l(x_1,\dots,x_n\r).
\end{equation}$$
Thus $\epsilon\l(\sigma_2\circ\sigma_1\r)=\epsilon\l(\sigma_2\r)\epsilon\l(\sigma_1\r)$, as desired. Uniqueness follows from the fact that $S_n$ is generated by transpositions.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

---

<i>Proof (solvability).</i> Consider the normal series $S_n\nsupgrp A_n\nsupgrp\l\{e\r\}$, which is not abelian since its composition factors are $\Z/2\Z$ and $A_n$. Since $A_n$ is simple, it has no non-trivial proper normal subgroups and hence $A_n\nsupgrp\l\{e\r\}$ is the only normal series for $A_n$. Furthermore, since $\l[S_n:A_n\r]=2$, we see that any proper normal subgroup $N\nsubgrpeq S_n$ is a subgroup of $A_n$. But then $N=N\cap A_n$ is normal, so either $N=\l\{e\r\}$ or $N=A_n$. Thus $A_n$ is the only non-trivial proper normal subgroup of $S_n$, so this is the only normal series for $S_n$. Thus $S_n$ does not admit an abelian series, so it is not solvable.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>
