---
mathLink: auto
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 28/06/2023 17:37:50
Tags: #Type/Proposition #Topic/Group_Theory

Proved by: [[Class Equation]], [[Lagrange's Theorem]], [[Cauchy's Theorem]], [[Isomorphism Theorems]]
References: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Specializations: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

``` ad-Proposition
title: Proposition.

Let $H\subgrp G$ be a non-trivial proper subgroup of a finite group $G$ and let $p$ be prime. Then the following results hold:
* If $G$ is a $p$-group and $H\nsubgrp G$, then $H\cap Z\l(G\r)$ is non-trivial. Furthermore, if $\l|H\r|=p$, then $H\subgrpeq Z\l(G\r)$.
* If $H$ is a $p$-group, then $\l[N_G\!\l(H\r):H\r]\equiv\l[G:H\r]\mod p$.
* If $H$ is a $p$-group but is not Sylow, then there is a $p$-group $K\subgrpeq G$ containing $H$ such that $\l[K:H\r]=p$ and $H\nsubgrp K$.
* If $G$ is a $p$-group, say $\l|G\r|=p^n$ for some $n\in\N^+$, then there is a normal series $\l\{e\r\}=G_0\nsubgrp G_1\nsubgrp\cdots\nsubgrp G_n=G$ such that $\l|G_i\r|=p^i$.

```

<b>Remark.</b> In particular, $p$-groups are solvable.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<i>Proof.</i>
* Let $G$ act on $H$ by conjugation. Then $H\cap Z\l(G\r)=\l\{h\in H\st\fa g\in G:gh=hg\r\}$ is the set of fixed points of the action, so, since $G$ is a non-trivial $p$-group, we have from the class equation that $\l|H\cap Z\l(G\r)\r|\equiv\l|H\r|\mod p$. But $H$ is $p$-subgroup by Lagrange’s Theorem, so $\l|H\cap Z\l(G\r)\r|$ is a multiple of $p$, hence non-trivial. Now, if $\l|H\r|=p$, then it is generated by every non-trivial element. Thus any non-trivial $x\in H\cap Z\l(G\r)$ generates $H=\gen{x}\subgrpeq Z\l(G\r)$, as desired.
* Let $H$ act on $G/H$ by left-multiplication. The fixed points of this action are the cosets $gH\in G/H$ such that $g^{-1}hg\in H$ for all $h\in H$, so $H\subseteq gHg^{-1}$ and hence $H=gHg^{-1}$ since their orders coincide. This occurs precisely when $g\in N_G\!\l(H\r)$, so the fixed points of this action is precisely the quotient $N_G\!\l(H\r)/H$. Its order is $\l[N_G\!\l(H\r):H\r]$, so the result follows from the class equation.
* Since $H$ is not a Sylow $p$-subgroup of $G$, we see that $\l[G:H\r]$ is a multiple of $p$ and hence $p$ divides $\l[N_G\!\l(H\r):H\r]$. By Cauchy’s Theorem, there is an element $x\in N_G\!\l(H\r)/H$ of order $p$, which generates a cyclic subgroup $K_0\coloneqq\gen{x}$. Set $K\coloneqq\pi^{-1}\!\l(K_0\r)$, which is a subgroup in $G$ containing $H$ since $\pi\l(h\r)=e\in K_0$ for all $h\in H$. Now, since $\ker\pi=H\leq K$ and $\pi\l(H\r)=\l\{e\r\}\nsubgrp K_0=\pi\l(K\r)$, we see from the Lattice Isomorphism Theorem that $H\nsubgrp K$ and that
$$\begin{equation}
    K/H\iso\pi\l(K\r)/\pi\l(H\r)=K_0/\l\{e\r\}\iso K_0.
\end{equation}$$
Thus $\l[K:H\r]=\l|K/H\r|=\l|K_0\r|=p$, as desired.
* Induct with base case $G_0=\l\{e\r\}$. If a group $G_i$ is constructed with $\l|G_i\r|=p^i$, then there is a $p$-group $G_{i+1}\subgrpeq G$ containing $G_i$ such that $\l[G_{i+1}:G_i\r]=p$ and $G_i\nsubgrp G_{i+1}$. Thus $\l|G_{i+1}\r|=p\l|G_i\r|=p^{i+1}$, which finishes the induction.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>
