---
mathLink: Borel Measures on $\R$
mathLink-blocks:
    lebesgue: Lebesgue Measure
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 13/09/2023 18:28:00
References:
Tags: #Type/Theorem #Topic/Real_Analysis

Proved by: [[Basic properties of measures#^monotone-convergence-of-sets]], [[Calculus on the Real Line#^jordan-decomposition]], [[Caratheodory's Extension Theorem]], [[Real Numbers#^heine-borel]]
References: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Specializations: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

``` ad-Theorem
title: Theorem (Borel Measures on $\R$).

Any increasing right-continuous function $f:\R\to\R$ induces a unique locally-finite Borel measure $\mu$ on $\R$, and, conversely, every such measure arises  this way.
* A function $f:\R\to\R$ is a distribution of a (unique) finite Borel signed measure $\nu$ iff $f$ is right-continuous and has bounded variation.

```

<b>Remark.</b> The Borel measure induced by an increasing right-continuous function $f$ is called its <i>Lebesgue-Steiltjes</i> measure. The <i>Lebesgue</i> measure is $\lambda\coloneqq\mu_\id$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span> ^lebesgue

---

<i>Proof.</i> We first establish everything except for the construction of the locally-finite Borel measure $\mu$, which we temporarily assume.
* Given a locally-finite Borel measure $\mu$ on $\R$, let $f:\R\to\R$ be defined by $x\mapsto\mu\l(0,x\r]$ if $x\geq0$ and $x\mapsto-\mu\l(x,0\r]$ if $x<0$, which is clearly increasing. To show that it is right-continuous, take $x\in\R$ and let $x_n\decto x$. If $x\geq0$, then $f\l(x\r)=\mu\l(0,x\r]=\lim_n\mu\l(0,x_n\r]=\lim_nf\l(x_n\r)$ since $\l(0,x\r]=\bigcap_n\l(0,x_n\r]$ and $\mu\l(0,x_n\r]<\infty$. The $x<0$ case follows similarly with $\l(x,0\r]=\bigcup_n\l(x_n,0\r]$. The uniqueness claim is easy to see.
* Suppose that $f$ is a distribution function of a finite Borel signed measure $\nu$, which by the same argument as above must be right-continuous. To see that it is of bounded variation, let $\R=\bigsqcup_n\l(a_n,b_n\r]$ be any partition and observe that $\sum_n\l|f\l(b_n\r)-f\l(a_n\r)\r|=\sum_n\l|\nu\l(a_n,b_n\r]\r|\leq\sum_n\l|\nu\r|\l(a_n,b_n\r]=\l|\nu\r|\l(\R\r)<\infty$. Conversely, if $f$ is right-continuous and is of bounded variation, consider its Jordan Decomposition $f=g_+-g_-$ where $g_\pm\coloneqq\frac{1}{2}\l(T_f\pm f\r)$ are bounded increasing functions. Since $T_f$ is also right-increasing, both $g_\pm$ are right-increasing and hence induce finite Borel measures $\nu_\pm$ on $\R$. The signed measure $\nu\coloneqq\nu_+-\nu_-$ is then as desired.

For the main proof, let $f:\R\to\R$ be an increasing right-continuous function. We first define $\mu$ as a premeasure on the algebra $\mc{A}$ generated by half-intervals $\l(a,b\r]$. Since $\R$ is $\sigma$-finite, we obtain a measure $\mu$ on the Borel $\sigma$-algebra $\mc{B}\l(\R\r)$. Indeed, every $A\in\mc{A}$ can be written as a finite disjoint union $A=\bigsqcup_{n<k}\l(a_n,b_n\r]$, for which we set $\mu\l(A\r)\coloneqq\sum_{n<k}\mu\l(a_n,b_n\r]=\sum_{n<k}\l[f\l(b_n\r)-f\l(a_n\r)\r]$. This is well-defined, for if $A=\bigsqcup_{n<k}I_n=\bigsqcup_{m<l}J_m$ where $I_n$ and $J_m$ are half-intervals, then taking their common refinement $\l\{I_n\cap J_m\r\}$ gives us that
$$\begin{equation}
    \sum_{n<k}\mu\l(I_n\r)=\sum_{n<k,m<l}\mu\l(I_n\cap J_m\r)=\sum_{m<l}\mu\l(J_m\r).
\end{equation}$$
Thus $\mu$ is a finitely-additive premeasure on $\mc{A}$, so it is countably-supadditive. It remains to show that $\mu$ is countably-subadditive, so take $A=\bigsqcup_n\l(a_n,b_n\r]\in\mc{A}$. Note that $A$ can be written as a <i>finite</i> disjoint union of half-intervals, so $\l\{\l(a_n,b_n\r]\r\}$ can be partitioned into finitely-many subsequences, each of which unions up to a single half-interval. By finite-additivity, we may w.l.o.g. assume that $A\eqqcolon\l(a,b\r]$ is a single half interval.
* Suppose that $A$ is bounded. Fix $\epsilon>0$ and choose $a'\in\l(a,a+\delta\r)$ and $b_n'\in\l(b_n,b_n+\delta_n\r)$, where $\delta$ and $\delta_n$ are by right-continuity of $f$ chosen small-enough so that $f\l(a'\r)\approx_\epsilon f\l(a\r)$ and $f\l(b_n'\r)\approx_{\epsilon/2^{n+1}}f\l(b_n\r)$. Then $\l[a',b\r]\subseteq\bigcup_n\l(a_n,b_n'\r)$, so by compactness we obtain a subcover $\l[a',b\r]\subseteq\bigcup_{n<N}\l(a_n,b_n'\r)$. Observe then that
$$\begin{equation}
    \mu\l(a,b\r]\approx_\epsilon\mu\l(a',b\r]\leq\sum_{n<N}\mu\l(a_n,b_n'\r]\leq\sum_n\mu\l(a_n,b_n'\r]\approx_\epsilon\sum_n\mu\l(a_n,b_n\r].
\end{equation}$$

For the unbounded case, let $l\in\R^+$ and set $I_l\coloneqq\l(-l,l\r]$. Then $I_l\cap A=I_l\cap\bigsqcup_n\l(a_n,b_n\r]=\bigsqcup_n\l(I_l\cap\l(a_n,b_n\r]\r)$ is bounded, so it follows from the previous case that $\mu\l(I_l\cap A\r)=\sum_n\mu\l(I_l\cap\l(a_n,b_n\r]\r)\leq\sum_n\mu\l(a_n,b_n\r]$. Letting $l\to\infty$ gives the desired result.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>
