---
mathLink: auto
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 17/10/2023 21:19:13
Tags: #Type/Definition #Topic/Real_Analysis

Types: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Examples: [[Bernoulli p-measure]], [[Lebesgue Measure]]
Constructions: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Properties: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Sufficiencies: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Equivalences: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>

``` ad-Definition
title: Definition.

Let $X$ be a topological space. The <b>Borel $\sigma$-algebra</b> on $X$ is the $\sigma$-algebra $\mc{B}\l(X\r)$ generated by the topology of $X$, whose elements are called <b>Borel sets</b>.

```

<b>Remark.</b> A subset $A\subseteq X$ is said to be $G_\delta$ if it is a countable intersection of open sets, and dually for $F_\sigma$. The form the first stages of the <i>Borel Hierarchy</i>.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<b>Remark.</b> We list some basic properties of the Borel $\sigma$-algebra.
* If $\mc{U}$ is a countable basis for $X$, then $\mc{B}\l(X\r)=\gen{\mc{U}}_\sigma$. Indeed, that $\gen{\mc{U}}_\sigma\subseteq\mc{B}\l(X\r)$ is trivial. Conversely, every open set $U\subseteq X$ can be written as $U=\bigcup_nU_n$ with each $U_n\in\mc{U}$, so $\gen{\mc{U}}_\sigma$ is a $\sigma$-algebra containing the open sets. Thus $\mc{B}\l(X\r)\subseteq\gen{\mc{U}}_\sigma$, as desired.
* If $X_1,\dots,X_d$ are second countable topological spaces and $X\coloneqq\prod_{i=1}^dX_i$, then $\mc{B}\l(X\r)=\bigotimes_{i=1}^d\mc{B}\l(X_i\r)$. Indeed, let $\mc{U}_i$ be a countable basis for $X_i$, which makes $X$ second countable too. For each open set $U\subseteq X$, we write $U=\bigcup_n\prod_{i=1}^dU_i$ for some $U_i\in\mc{U}_i\subseteq\mc{B}\l(X_i\r)$, so $\mc{B}\l(X\r)\subseteq\bigotimes_{i=1}^d\mc{B}\l(X_i\r)$ as desired. Conversely, for every $A_i\in\mc{B}\l(X_i\r)$, we can write
