<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 20/03/2023 08:36:26
Tags: #Definition #In_Progress

Trying to find a basis in which $T$ has a simple matrix. The simplest form is when $T$ is a diagonal matrix.

**Theorem.** If $\cchi=\prod\l(x-\lambda_i\r)^{n_i}$, that is, $\cchi$ splits, the following are equivalent.
* $\mu=\prod\l(x-\lambda_i\r)$ where $\lambda_i$ are distinct eigenvalues ($\mu$ splits)
* $T$ is diagonalizable.
* $V=\bigoplus E_{\lambda_i}$.

**Remark.** If $\cchi$ does not split, then $T$ is not diagonalizable. However, we may always extend the field $K$ so that $\cchi$ splits. But even if $\cchi$ splits, $T$ may not be diagonalizable.

**Corollary.** If all eigenvalues are distinct, then $T$ is diagonalizable. Converse is not true.

---

If we are not able to find a diagonal matrix, the next best things is a triangular form.

**Example.** The Jordan matrix $J_2\!\l(\lambda\r)\coloneqq
\begin{bmatrix}
    \lambda & 1 \\
    0 & \lambda
\end{bmatrix}$ is not diagonalizable.

**Theorem (Schur).** Suppose $\cchi$ splits. Then $T$ is triangularizable; that is, there exists a basis $\mc{B}$ such that $\l[T\r]_\mc{B}$ is upper-triangular.

_Proof_. Let $\lambda_1\in K$ be a root of $\cchi$. Then $\lambda_1$ is an eigenvalue of $T$, so there exists a non-zero $v_1\in V$ such that $T\l(v_1\r)=\lambda_1v_1$. Choose a basis $\l\{v_1,\dots,v_n\r\}$ of $V$. Then the first column of the matrix of $T$ is $\tpl{\lambda_1,0,\dots,0}^\trans$. Let $R$ be the operator on $\span\l\{v_2,\dots,v_n\r\}$ induced by the bottom-right block of $\l[T\r]$. Then $\cchi_R\divides\cchi_T$, so $\cchi_R$ splits. The proof follows by induction.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

**Remark.** The upper-triangular form presented here is not $\textrm{`}$canonical$\textrm{'}$, in the sense that the non-zero entries depend on the choice of basis chosen.

---

We shall study the Jordan Canonical Form, first in the case of nilpotent operators.

**Remark.** For nilpotent operators, $\cchi=x^n$. The typical nilpotent matrix $N_n$ has zeros everywhere and with a diagonal of 1$\textrm{'}$s above the main diagonal. Also, recall that the derivative operator $V$, the space of polynomials with degree $\leq n$, is nilpotent. Note that $V$ is cyclic since $V=\span\l\{x^n,Dx^n,\dots,D^nx^n\r\}$, so the matrix representation of $D$ has zeros everywhere and with a diagonal of 1$\textrm{'}$s below the main diagonal. Note that this is the transpose of nilpotent matrices. We prove this in general.

**Lemma.** Suppose $T^n=0$ and $V$ is cyclic, say generated by $v$. Then, under the basis $\l\{v,Tv,\dots,T^{n-1}v\r\}$, then the matrix of $T$ has zeros everywhere and with a diagonal of 1$\textrm{'}$s above the main diagonal.

_Proof_. Since $v$ is a cyclic vector, there exists some $n$ such that $v,Tv,T^2v,\dots,T^{n-1}v$ is a basis for $V$. The matrix of $T$ in this basis is the transpose of the desired since $T^n=0$. Now, reordering the basis, we are done.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

**Theorem.** Suppose $T$ is nilpotent. Then $V=V_1\oplus\cdots\oplus V_r$ where $V_i$ are $T$-cyclic subspaces of $V$.

**Corollary (Canonical Form for Nilpotent Operators).** If $T$ is nilpotent, then there exist $n_1\leq n_2\leq\cdots\leq n_r$ such that the matrix of $T$ is in block diagonal form, with blocks being $N_{n_i}$. The **nilpotency degree of $T$** is $n_r$.

_Proof_. If $T=0$, then $V=K\span\l\{v_1\r\}\oplus\cdots\oplus K\span\l\{v_r\r\}$ and each $\span\l\{v_i\r\}$ is cyclic. Otherwise, since $T$ is nilpotent, $\ker T\neq\l\{0\r\}$. In particular, $\im T\neq V$. Also, $T$ is nilpotent on $\im T$, so, by induction, $\im T=V_1\oplus\cdots\oplus V_r$ where each $V_i$ is cyclic. Let $v_i\in V_i$ be a cyclic vector and let $u_i$ be such that $T\l(u_i\r)=v_i$. Let $C_T\!\l(u_i\r)$ be the $T$-cyclic subspace generated by $u_i$. We claim that
$$\begin{equation}
    V=U\oplus C_T\!\l(u_i\r)\oplus\cdots\oplus C_T\!\l(u_r\r).
\end{equation}$$
