<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 13/09/2023 18:28:00
Tags: #Type/Example #Topic/Real_Analysis

Types: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Examples: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Constructions: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Properties: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Sufficiencies: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Equivalences: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: [[Caratheodory's Extension Theorem]], [[Real Numbers#^heine-borel]]

``` ad-Example
title: Example.

For all $d\geq1$, the Euclidean space $\R^d$ admits a premeasure $\lambda$ on the algebra $\mc{A}$ of finite unions of boxes in $\R^d$ as follows.
* For a box $B\coloneqq\prod_{i=1}^dI_i$, set $\lambda\l(B\r)\coloneqq\prod_{i=1}^d\ell\l(I_i\r)$ where $\ell\l(I_i\r)$ is the length of $I_i$.
* For all $A\in\mc{A}$, partition $A=\bigsqcup_{n<k}B_n$ into boxes and set $\lambda\l(A\r)\coloneqq\sum_{n<k}\lambda\l(B_n\r)$.

This premeasure extends to the <b>Lebesgue measure</b> on the $\sigma$-algebra $\gen{\mc{A}}_\sigma$.

```

<i>Proof.</i> We need to check that $\mu\l(A\r)$ is well-defined and countably-additive. For well-definition, we define a <i>grid-partition</i> of a box $B\coloneqq\prod_{i=1}^dI_i$ as a finite partition $\mc{G}$ into boxes defined by partitioning each $I_k=\bigsqcup_{n<N_k}I_k^n$ and set $\mc{G}\coloneqq\l\{I_1^{n_1}\times\cdots\times I_d^{n_d}:0\leq n_i<N_i\r\}$. Note that $\lambda\l(B\r)=\sum_{G\in\mc{G}}\lambda\l(G\r)$ for any grid-partition $\mc{G}$ of $B$. Now, let $\mc{P}$ and $\mc{Q}$ be finite partitions of $A$ into boxes. Let $\mc{R}$ be a common refinement of $\mc{P}$ and $\mc{Q}$, i.e., let $\mc{R}$ be a partition of $A$ such that each $R\in\mc{R}$ is a box contained in some $P\in\mc{P}$ and some $Q\in\mc{Q}$ such that $\bigcup\mc{R}=A$. We claim that $\mc{R}$ can be refined further into a partition $\mc{R}'$ of $A$ such that for each $B\in\mc{P}\cup\mc{Q}$, the collection $\mc{R}_B\coloneqq\l\{R\in\mc{R}'\st R\subseteq B\r\}$ is a grid-partition of $B$. Then, combined with the fact that $\lambda$ is finitely-additive on grid-partitions, this shows us that
$$\begin{equation}
    \sum_{P\in\mc{P}}\lambda\l(P\r)=\sum_{P\in\mc{P}}\sum_{R\in\mc{R}_P}\lambda\l(R\r)=\sum_{R\in\mc{R}'}\lambda\l(R\r)=\sum_{Q\in\mc{Q}}\sum_{R\in\mc{R}_Q}\lambda\l(R\r)=\sum_{Q\in\mc{Q}}\lambda\l(Q\r).
\end{equation}$$
Indeed, for a fixed $i$, the partition generated by $\l\{\pi_i\!\l(R\r)\r\}_{R\in\mc{R}}$ is a finite disjoint union $\bigsqcup_{j<N_i}I_i^j$ of intervals. The collection $\mc{R}'\coloneqq A\cap\l\{\prod_{i=1}^dI_i^{j_i}\st0\leq j_i<N_i\r\}$ obtained as the intersection of $A$ with products of those intervals is then the desired partition of $A$. Note that this also shows that $\lambda$ is a finitely-additive measure on $\R^d$. It remains to show that $\lambda$ is countably-additive, which we prove in several steps. Let $B\in\mc{A}$ be a box and partition it into countably-many boxes $B=\bigsqcup_{n\in\N}B_n$.
* Suppose that $B$ is a bounded box. Consider a closed box $B'\subseteq B$ such that $\lambda\l(B\comp B'\r)<\epsilon/2$ and consider open boxes $B_n'\supseteq B_n$ such that $\lambda\l(B_n'\comp B_n\r)<\epsilon/2^{n+2}$. Note that $\lambda\l(B\r)\approx_{\epsilon/2}\lambda\l(B'\r)$ and $\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n'\r)\approx_{\epsilon/2}\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n\r)$. But $B'\subseteq\bigcup_{n\in\N}B_n'$ is compact, so it has a finite subcover $\l\{B_n'\r\}_{n<N}$. Observe then that
$$\begin{equation}
    \lambda\l(B\r)\approx_{\epsilon/2}\lambda\l(B'\r)\leq\lambda\l(\bigcup_{n<N}B_n'\r)\leq\sum_{n<N}\lambda\l(B_n'\r)\leq\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n'\r)\approx_{\epsilon/2}\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n\r),
\end{equation}$$
so $\lambda\l(B\r)\leq\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n\r)+\epsilon$ and hence $\lambda\l(B\r)\leq\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n\r)$. Since finitely-additive premeasures are always supadditive, the result follows.
* Suppose now that $B$ is an unbounded box. Let $L\in\R^+$ and consider the box $R_L\coloneqq\l[-L,L\r]^d$. Then $R_L\cap B=R_L\cap\bigsqcup_{n\in\N}B_n=\bigsqcup_{n\in\N}\l(R_L\cap B_n\r)$ is bounded, so it follows from the bounded case that $\lambda\l(R_L\cap B\r)=\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(R_L\cap B_n\r)\leq\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(B_n\r)$. Letting $L\to\infty$ gives the desired result.

Finally, let $A\in\mc{A}$ be arbitrary and partitioned into elements $A_n\in\mc{A}$ as $A=\bigsqcup_{n\in\N}A_n$. Since $A\in\mc{A}$, we have a finite partition $A=\bigsqcup_{k<K}B_k$ into boxes. Similarly, partition each $A_n=\bigsqcup_{m<M_n}B_{n,m}$ into boxes. Observe that $B_k=\bigsqcup_{n\in\N}\bigsqcup_{m\in M_n}B_k\cap B_{n,m}$ and $B_{n,m}=\bigsqcup_{k<K}B_k\cap B_{n,m}$, so the lemmas above give us that
$$\begin{equation}
    \lambda\l(B_k\r)=\sum_{n\in\N}\sum_{m<M_n}\lambda\l(B_k\cap B_{n,m}\r)\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \textrm{and}\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \lambda\l(B_{n,m}\r)=\sum_{k<K}\lambda\l(B_k\cap B_{n,m}\r)
\end{equation}$$
for all $k<K$, $n\in\N$, and $m<M_n$. We now compute
$$\begin{equation}
    \lambda\l(A\r)=\lambda\l(\bigsqcup_{k<K}B_k\r)=\sum_{k<K}\lambda\l(B_k\r)=\sum_{k<K}\sum_{n\in\N}\sum_{m<M_n}\lambda\l(B_k\cap B_{n,m}\r)=\sum_{n\in\N}\sum_{m<M_n}\sum_{k<K}\lambda\l(B_k\cap B_{n,m}\r)=\sum_{n\in\N}\sum_{m<M_n}\lambda\l(B_{n,m}\r)=\sum_{n\in\N}\lambda\l(A_n\r),
\end{equation}$$
so $\lambda$ is countably-additive as desired.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>
