<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 21/11/2023 12:54:10
References:
Tags: #Type/Proposition #Topic/Real_Analysis

Proved by: <i>Not Applicable</i>
References: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Specializations: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

``` ad-Proposition
title: Proposition (Monotone Class Lemma).

Let $\mc{A}$ be an algebra on a set $X$. If $\mc{C}\subseteq\pow\l(X\r)$ is the monotone class generated by $\mc{A}$, then $\mc{C}=\gen{\mc{A}}_\sigma$.

```

<b>Remark.</b> A collection of subsets of $X$ is called a <i>monotone class</i> if it closed under countable increasing unions and countable decreasing intersections. If $\mc{A}$ is a collection of subsets, the monotone class <i>generated by $\mc{A}$</i> is the intersection of all monotone classes containing $\mc{A}$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<i>Proof.</i> Note that $\gen{\mc{A}}_\sigma$ is itself a monotone class, so $\mc{C}\subseteq\gen{\mc{A}}_\sigma$. For the reverse inclusion, it suffices to show that $\mc{C}$ is an algebra, for then it is a $\sigma$-algebra since every countable union $\bigcup_nB_n$ can be written as an increasing union $\bigcup_n\l(\bigcup_{i<n}B_i\r)$.
* (Complement). Consider the collection $\mc{S}\coloneqq\l\{B\in\mc{C}\st B^c\in\mc{C}\r\}$. Then $\mc{A}\subseteq\mc{S}$, and observe that $\l(\bigcup_nB_n\r)^c=\bigcap_nB_n^c\in\mc{C}$ and $\l(\bigcap_nB_n\r)^c=\bigcup_nB_n\in\mc{C}$ for all $B_n\in\mc{S}$, so $\mc{S}$ is a monotone class containing $\mc{A}$. Thus $\mc{C}\subseteq\mc{S}$, so $\mc{C}=\mc{S}$ as desired.
* (Finite unions). Fix $C\in\mc{C}$ and consider the collection $\mc{S}_C\coloneqq\l\{B\in\mc{C}\st C\cup B\in\mc{C}\r\}$. We claim that $\mc{C}=\mc{S}_C$, for then $B\cup C\in\mc{C}$ for any $B,C\in\mc{C}$. Indeed, this is a monotone class since $C\cup\l(\bigcup_nB_n\r)=\bigcup_n\l(C\cup B_n\r)\in\mc{C}$ and $C\cup\l(\bigcap_nB_n\r)=\bigcap_n\l(C\cup B_n\r)\in\mc{C}$ for all $B_n\in\mc{S}_C$. Furthermore, note that $\mc{A}\subseteq\mc{S}_A$ for every $A\in\mc{A}$, so $\mc{C}\subseteq\mc{S}_A$. In particular we have $C\cup A=A\cup C\in\mc{C}$ for all $A\in\mc{A}$, so $\mc{A}\subseteq\mc{S}_C$ too. Thus $\mc{C}=\mc{S}_C$, as desired.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>
