---
title: Preservation of Polish spaces
date: 2025-06-20
tags: [In_Progress]
---

We give several instances where being \ref[Polish]{polish_space} is preserved (or not) under set-theoretic operations.

# Positive results and Proofs

Recall that any Polish space $X$ admits a compatible metric $d$ such that $d\leq1$. Indeed, let $d\coloneqq d_0/(1+d_0)$, for any compatible metric $d_0$ on $X$.

## Sums

Recall that the topology on the \ref[disjoint union]{coproduct_topology} $X\coloneqq\coprod_\alpha X_\alpha$ of a family of topological spaces is given by declaring $U\subeq X$ to be open iff $U\cap X_\alpha$ is open in $X_\alpha$ for each $\alpha$.

\begin{theorem}

The disjoint union $X\coloneqq\coprod_{n<\omega}X_n$ of countably-many Polish spaces is Polish.

\end{theorem}

\begin{proof}

It is clear that $X$ is separable. For each $n<\omega$, let $d_n\leq1$ be a compatible metric on $X_n$. Define a metric $d$ on $X$ by letting $d(x,y)\coloneqq d_n(x,y)$ if $x,y\in X_n$, and $d(x,y)\coloneqq1$ if $x\in X_n$, $y\in X_m$, and $n\neq m$. We claim that $d$ is compatible with the topology on $X$.
>Indeed, if $U$ is a neighborhood of some $x\in X$, then $x\in X_n$ for some $n$ and hence the $\epsilon$-ball of $x$ in $d_n$ lies in $U\cap X_n$ for some $\epsilon>0$. Therefore, the $\epsilon$-ball of $x$ in $d$ lies in $U$, as desired.

Finally, $(X,d)$ is complete since if $(x_i)$ is a Cauchy sequence in $X$, then there exists $n<\omega$ such that $x_i\in X_n$ for all eventually $i<\omega$, so it is convergent.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

\end{proof}

## Products

Recall that the topology on the _\ref[product]{product_topology}_ $X\coloneqq\prod_\alpha X_\alpha$ of a family of topological spaces is generated by the subbasic open sets of the form $\pi_\alpha^{-1}(U_\alpha)$ for open sets $U_\alpha\subeq X_\alpha$.

\begin{theorem}\label{product}

The product $X\coloneqq\prod_{n<\omega}X_n$ of countably-many Polish spaces is Polish.

\end{theorem}

&emsp;&emsp;Separability of $X$ is given by the following fact.

\begin{fact}[\ref{preservation_of_separability}]

Let $\l\\{X\_\alpha\r\\}\_{\alpha\leq\mf{c}}$ be a family of continuum-many separable spaces. Then $\prod\_{\alpha\leq\mf{c}}X\_\alpha$ is separable too.

\end{fact}

\begin{proof}[of Theorem \iref{product}]

For each $n<\omega$, let $d_n\leq1$ be a compatible metric on $X_n$ and define a metric $d$ on $X$ by setting $d(x,y)\coloneqq\sum_nd_n(\pi_n(x),\pi_n(y))/2^n$. We claim that $d$ is compatible with the topology on $X$.
> Indeed, every basic open set of $X$ is of the form $U\coloneqq\bigcap_{n\leq k}\pi_n^{-1}(U_n)$ for some $k<\omega$ and open sets $U_n\subeq X_n$. If $x\in U$, so that $\pi_n(x)\in U_n$ for each $n\leq k$, then there are $\epsilon_n>0$ such that $B_{\epsilon_n}(\pi_n(x))\subeq U_n$ for each $n\leq k$. Let $\epsilon\coloneqq\min_{n\leq k}\epsilon_n/2^n$, so that $B_\epsilon(x)\subeq\pi_n^{-1}(U_n)$ since if $d(x,y)<\epsilon$, then $d_n(\pi_n(x),\pi_n(y))<\epsilon2^n\leq\epsilon_n$.

Finally, $(X,d)$ is complete since if $(x_i)$ is a Cauchy sequence in $X$, then $(\pi_n(x_i))_i$ is a Cauchy sequence in $X_n$ for each $n$, and hence convergent. Thus $(x_i)$ is convergent too, as desired.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>

\end{proof}

## Subsets

Closed subset of a Polish space is Polish. Indeed, they are clearly completely-metrizable, and they are separable since \ref[any subset of a separable metrizable space is separable]{preservation_of_separability}.

<br>

&emsp;&emsp;More generally, we have the following criterion for a subset of a Polish space to be Polish.

\begin{theorem}

Let $X$ be a Polish space. A subset $Y\subeq X$ is Polish iff $Y$ is $G_\delta$ in $X$.

\end{theorem}

\begin{proof}

\TODO

\end{proof}

# Negative results and Counterexamples
