---
mathLink: $A_n$ is simple for $n\geq5$
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 11/05/2023 11:02:50
Tags: #Type/Theorem #Topic/Group_Theory

Proved by: [[Characterizations of normality]]
References: _Not Applicable_
Justifications: _Not Applicable_

Specializations: _Not Applicable_
Generalizations: _Not Applicable_

``` ad-Theorem
title: Theorem (Simplicity of $A_n$).

_If $n\geq 5$, then the alternating group $A_n$ is simple._

```

_Proof_. We first prove two lemmas, that $A_n$ is generated by $3$-cycles (this holds for all $n$), and that all $3$-cycles are conjugate in $A_n$.
* Since every $\sigma\in A_n$ is generated by an even number of transpositions, it suffices to show that every product of two transpositions can be written as $3$-cycle(s). Indeed, observe that $\l(a\ b\r)\l(c\ d\r)=\l(a\ b\ c\r)\l(b\ c\ d\r)$. If $a,b,c,d$ are distinct, we obtain a product of two $3$-cycles. Otherwise, it either reduces to the identity or one $3$-cycle.

* First, observe that $\sigma\l(a_1\ \cdots\ a_n\r)\sigma^{-1}=\l(\sigma\l(a_1\r)\ \cdots\ \sigma\l(a_n\r)\r)$ for any $\sigma\in S_n$. Let $\l(a\ b\ c\r)$ and $\l(a'\ b'\ c'\r)$ be $3$-cycles in $A_n$ and let $\sigma\in S_n$ be any permutation mapping $a\to a'$, $b\to b'$, and $c\to c'$. Then $\l(a'\ b'\ c'\r)=\l(\sigma\l(a\r)\ \sigma\l(b\r)\ \sigma\l(c\r)\r)=\sigma\l(a\ b\ c\r)\sigma^{-1}$, so we are done if $\sigma$ is even. Otherwise, since $n\geq5$, there exist $r,s\in S_n$ distinct from $a,b,c$. Then $\l(r\ s\r)$ commutes with $\l(a\ b\ c\r)$, so $\tilde{\sigma}\coloneqq\sigma\circ\l(r\ s\r)$ is even and maps $a\to a'$, $b\to b'$, and $c\to c'$.

To show that $A_n$ is simple, let $\l\{e\r\}\neq N\nsubgrpeq A_n$. Since $N=\bigcup_{\sigma\in N}\l[\sigma\r]$, where $\l[\sigma\r]$ is the conjugacy class of $\sigma$ in $A_n$, it suffices to show that $N$ contains a $3$-cycle $\sigma$. Then, since all $3$-cycles are conjugate in $A_n$ and $A_n$ is generated by $3$-cycles, we see that every $\sigma\in A_n$ decomposes as a product of permutations in $\l[\sigma\r]\subgrpeq N$, so $A_n\subgrpeq N$. To do so, let $\sigma\in N$ be a non-trivial element with the maximal number of fixed points. Decompose $\l\{1,\dots,n\r\}$ into disjoint orbits of $\gen{\sigma}$.
* If all non-trivial orbits are $2$-cycles, then there are at least two orbits, say $\l\{a,b\r\}$ and $\l\{c,d\r\}$. Restricted to $\l\{a,b,c,d\r\}$, we have $\sigma=\l(a\ b\r)\l(c\ d\r)$. Since $n\geq 5$, let $e\not\in\l\{a,b,c,d\r\}$ and set $\tilde{\sigma}\coloneqq\rho\sigma\rho^{-1}\sigma^{-1}$ where $\rho\coloneqq\l(c\ d\ e\r)$. Since $N$ is normal, we see that $\rho\sigma\rho^{-1}\in N$ and hence $\tilde{\sigma}\in N$ too. Note that any $f\not\in\l\{a,b,c,d,e\r\}$ fixed by $\sigma$ is also fixed by $\tilde{\sigma}$. But $\sigma\l(a\r)=b$ whereas $\tilde{\sigma}$ fixed $a$, contradicting that $\sigma$ has the maximal number of fixed points.

Thus there is at least one cycle in the orbit decomposition of $\sigma$ of the form $\l(a\ b\ c\ \cdots\r)$. We claim that $\sigma=\l(a\ b\ c\r)$.
* If not, then $\sigma\l(d\r)\neq d$ for some $d\not\in\l\{a,b,c\r\}$, say $\sigma\l(d\r)=e$ for some $e$. If $e\in\l\{a,b,c\r\}$, then $\sigma$ permutes $4$ elements and is hence odd. Thus $e\not\in\l\{a,b,c\r\}$, so let $\rho\coloneqq\l(c\ d\ e\r)$ and $\tilde{\sigma}\coloneqq\rho\sigma\rho^{-1}\sigma^{-1}\in N$ as before. Again, $\tilde{\sigma}$ fixes all fixed points of $\sigma$, but $\sigma\l(a\r)=b$ whereas $\tilde{\sigma}$ fixes $a$, a contradiction.<span style="float:right;">$\blacksquare$</span>
