---
mathLink-blocks:
    category-of-structures: $\cathom$
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 14/12/2023 17:16:46
Tags: #Type/Definition #Topic/Model_Theory

Types: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Examples: [[Monoid]], [[Group]], [[Ring]], [[Field]], [[Module]]
Constructions: [[Definable Sets]], [[Model]]
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Properties: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Sufficiencies: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Equivalences: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>

``` ad-Definition
title: Definition.

Let $\sigma\coloneqq\tpl{\mc{F},\mc{R},\mc{C}}$ be a signature. A <b>$\sigma$-structure</b> is a pair $\mc{A}\coloneqq(A,\sigma^\mc{A})$ consisting of a set $A$, called the <b>universe</b>, and an <b>interpretation</b> of $\sigma$ that assigns
* a function $f^\mc{A}\!:A^n\to A$ to each function symbol $f\in\mc{F}_n$ of arity $n$,
* a relation $R^\mc{A}\subseteq A^n$ to each relation symbol $R\in\mc{R}_n$ of arity $n$, and
* an element $c^\mc{A}\in A$ to each constant symbol $c\in\mc{C}$.

The <b>category of $\sigma$-structures</b> is the category $\cathom$ whose objects are $\sigma$-structures and whose morphisms from $\mc{A}$ to $\mc{B}$ are functions $h:A\to B$ such that $h(c^\mc{A})=c^\mc{B}$ for each $c\in\mc{C}$, $h(f^\mc{A}(\vec{a}))=f^\mc{B}(h(\vec{a}))$ for each $f\in\mc{F}_n$ and $\vec{a}\in A^n$, and $R^\mc{A}(\vec{a})\Rightarrow R^\mc{B}(h(\vec{a}))$ for each $R\in\mc{R}_n$ and $\vec{a}\in A^n$.

```
^category-of-structures

<b>Remark.</b> A <i>weak $\sigma$-substructure</i> $\mc{A}$ of a $\sigma$-structure $\mc{B}$ is a subobject of $\mc{B}$ in $\cathom$; explicitly, this occurs iff there is a morphism $h:\mc{A}\to\mc{B}$ whose underlying function is injective. If we additionally require that $R^\mc{A}(\vec{a})\Leftrightarrow R^\mc{B}(h(\vec{a}))$ for all $R\in\mc{R}_n$ and $\vec{a}\in A^n$, then $h:\mc{A}\into\mc{B}$ is said to be a <i>$\sigma$-embedding</i>. The subcategory of $\cathom$ whose morphisms are $\sigma$-embeddings is denoted $\catemb$, whose subobjects are called <i>$\sigma$-substructures</i>.
* For any morphism $h:\mc{A}\to\mc{B}$ in $\cathom$, its image $h\l(A\r)$ is the universe of some $\sigma$-substructure $\mc{B}'$ of $\mc{B}$, and $h:\mc{A}\into\mc{B}$ iff $\mc{A}\iso\mc{B}'$. Note that any subset $B'\subseteq B$ supports at most one $\sigma$-substructure of $\mc{B}$, and it does iff $B'$ contains all constants $c^\mc{B}$ and is closed under all functions $f^\mc{B}$.

For any subset $A\subseteq B$ of a $\sigma$-structure $\mc{B}\coloneqq(B,\sigma^\mc{B})$, the <i>$\sigma$-structure generated by $A$</i> is the intersection of all $\sigma$-substructures of $\mc{B}$ containing $A$, denoted $\gen{A}_\mc{B}$. A more bottom-up approach is obtained by constructing the universe of $\gen{A}_\mc{B}$ as $\bigcup_nA_n$, where $A_0\coloneqq A\cup\l\{c^\mc{B}\st c\in\mc{C}\r\}$ and $A_{n+1}\coloneqq A_n\cup\bigcup_m\bigcup_{f\in\mc{F}_m}f^\mc{B}\!\l(A_n^m\r)$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<b>Remark.</b> A $\sigma$-structure $\mc{A}$ is what gives <i>semantics</i> to the <i>syntactic</i> definition of the signature $\sigma$, which can be extended to both $\sigma$-terms and $\sigma$-formulas. Indeed, the <i>interpretation</i> of an extended $\sigma$-term $t[\vec{v}]$ in $\mc{A}$ is the function $t^\mc{A}[\vec{v}]:A^{|\vec{v}|}\to A$ defined by induction on its construction, as follows. For each $\vec{a}\in A^{|\vec{v}|}$: ^interpretation
* If $t=c\in\mc{C}$, then $t^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})\coloneqq c^\mc{A}$, and if $t=(\vec{v})_i$, then $t^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})\coloneqq(\vec{a})_i$.
* If $t=f\l(t_1,\dots,t_n\r)$ for some $t_i\in\Term\l(\sigma\r)$ and $f\in\mc{F}_n$, so each $t_i[\vec{v}]\in\ExtTerm\l(\sigma\r)$, then $t^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})\coloneqq f^\mc{A}\!\l(t_1^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a}),\dots,t_n^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})\r)$.

Similarly, the <i>interpretation</i> of an extended $\sigma$-formula $\phi[\vec{v}]$ in $\mc{A}$ is the $|\vec{v}|$-ary relation on $A$ defined by induction on its construction, as follows. For each $\vec{a}\in A^{|\vec{v}|}$:
* If $\phi=\l(t_1=t_2\r)$, so in particular both $t_i[\vec{v}]\in\ExtTerm\l(\sigma\r)$, then $\phi^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ holds iff $t_1^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})=t_2^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$.
* If $\phi=R\l(t_1,\dots,t_n\r)$ where each $t_i\in\Term\l(\sigma\r)$ and $R\in\mc{R}_n$, so in particular each $t_i[\vec{v}]\in\ExtTerm\l(\sigma\r)$, then $\phi^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ holds iff $R^\mc{A}\!\l(t_1^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a}),\dots,t_n^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})\r)$ holds.
* If $\phi=\lnot\psi$ for some $\psi\in\Form\l(\sigma\r)$, so in particular $\psi[\vec{v}]\in\ExtForm\l(\sigma\r)$, then $\phi^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ holds iff $\psi^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ fails.
* If $\phi=\psi_1\land\psi_2$ for some $\psi_i\in\Form\l(\sigma\r)$, so in particular $\psi_i[\vec{v}]\in\ExtForm\l(\sigma\r)$, then $\phi^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ holds iff both $\psi_1^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ and $\psi_2^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ hold. Similarly for $\phi=\psi_1\lor\psi_2$.
* If $\phi=\ex u\psi$ for some $\psi\in\Form\l(\sigma\r)$ and variable symbol $u$, so in particular $u\not\in\vec{v}$ and $\psi[\vec{v},u]\in\ExtForm\l(\sigma\r)$, then $\phi^\mc{A}[\vec{v},u](\vec{a})$ holds iff there exists $b\in A$ such that $\psi^\mc{A}[\vec{v},u](\vec{a},b)$ holds. Similarly for $\phi=\fa u\psi$.

For an extended $\sigma$-formula $\phi[\vec{v}]$ and a tuple $\vec{a}\in A^{|\vec{v}|}$, we say that $\mc{A}$ <i>models</i> $\phi[\vec{v}]$, and write $\mc{A}\models\phi[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$, whenever $\phi^\mc{A}[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$ holds. Abusing notation, we write $\phi(\vec{v})$ for $\phi[\vec{v}]$ and $\phi(\vec{a})$ for $\phi[\vec{v}](\vec{a})$; similarly for (extended) $\sigma$-terms.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>
