---
title: Subgroup
date: 2024-06-06T19:40:13-04:00
references: []
tags: [In_Progress]
---

# Definition and Characterizations

A standard method of studying an object $-$ in this case, a {{< link file="group" display="group" type="references" >}} $G$ $-$ is to analyze other groups that ‘sit inside’ $G$. This is formalized in the following

{{< env "definition" >}}

Let $G$ be a group. A **subgroup** of $G$ is a subset $H\subseteq G$ equipped with a group structure making the inclusion $H\into G$ a group homomorphism.

<br>

&emsp;&emsp;We write $H\substructeq G$ to indicate that $H$ is a subgroup of $G$.

{{< /env >}}

Note that any sub*set* $H\subseteq G$ inherits the operation from $G$, and makes it a sub*group* iff said operation is closed. The closure condition can be simplified to only requiring that $gh^{-1}\in H$ for all $g,h\in H$.

<br>

&emsp;&emsp;From a model-theoretic point of view, subgroups of $G$ are simply {{< link file="substructure" display="substructures" type="generalizations" >}} thereof, viewed as a {{< link file="model" display="model" type="references" >}} of the {{< link file="group" display="theory of groups" type="references" section="The Theory $T_\textrm{Grp}$" >}}.

<br><br>

## Subgroup Generation

Given a subset $A\subseteq G$, the subgroup *generated* by $A$ is the smallest subgroup $H\substructeq G$ containing $A$. It is clearly unique, and is thus denoted by $\gen{A}$. Such a group can be realized in many ways.
* <span style="color:gray">(Element).</span> The most direct group-theoretic construction is simply letting
$$\begin{equation}
    \gen{A}\coloneqq\l\\{g\in G\st g=a_1^{\epsilon_1}\cdots a_n^{\epsilon_n}\textrm{ for some }a_1,\dots,a_n\in A\textrm{ and }\epsilon_1,\dots,\epsilon_n=\pm1\r\\}
\end{equation}$$
be the subgroup of all elements expressible as (finite) combinations of elements in $A$ and their inverses.
* <span style="color:gray">(Top-down).</span> We can let $\gen{A}$ be the intersection of all subgroup $H\substructeq G$ containing $A$. This clearly works, but is too unwieldy to deal with.
* <span style="color:gray">(Bottom-up).</span> We can construct $\gen{A}$ starting with $A\cup\l\\{e\r\\}$ by inductively closing it under the group operation and inversion. Only a countable induction is needed, and this construction generalizes {{< link file="substructure" mod="dag" type="generalizations" section="Substructure Generation" >}} to arbitrary substructures.
* <span style="color:gray">(Free Construction).</span> A {{< link file="category" display="category" type="references" >}}-theoretic construction is given by setting $\gen{A}$ be the image of the canonical map {{< link file="free_group" mod="dag" type="references" >}} $F(A)\to G$ induced by the inclusion $A\into G$.

The {{< link file="cyclic_group" display="cyclic" type="constructions" >}} groups are those that can be generated by a single element, and are thus one of the simplest types of groups. More generally, the {{< link file="finitely_generated_group" display="finitely-generated" type="constructions" >}} groups are those that can be generated by a finite subset thereof.

# Lattice of Subgroups
