---
mathLink: $\cattop$ is complete
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 27/12/2023 17:25:33
Tags: #Type/Proposition #Topic/Topology/Later

Proved by: <i>Not Applicable</i>
References: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: <i>Not Applicable</i>

Specializations: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Generalizations: <i>Not Applicable</i>

``` ad-Proposition
title: Proposition.

<span style="color:pink">Here, describe the construction of limits/colimits in $\cattop$ and mention initial/final topologies.</span>

```

<i>Proof.</i> 

---

<span style="color:red">fix this...</span> The category $\cattop$ admit subobjects, (co)products, and quotients.
* (<i>Subspace</i>). We equip a subset $S\subseteq X$ with the topology whose open sets are of the form $U\cap S$ for some open set $U$ of $X$. If $\mc{B}$ is a basis for the topology on $X$, then the subspace topology contains open sets of the form $B\cap S$ for $B\in\mc{B}$ instead. Similarly for subbasis. ^subspace
* (<i>Product</i>). We equip the product $X\times Y$ with the topology generated by the basis $\mc{B}\coloneqq\l\{U\times V\st U\in\mc{T}_X,V\in\mc{T}_Y\r\}$. If $\mc{B}_X$ and $\mc{B}_Y$ are bases for $\mc{T}_X$ and $\mc{T}_y$, then we may take $U\in\mc{B}_X$ and $V\in\mc{B}_Y$ instead. The product topology also admits a subbasis of all sets of the form $\pi^{-1}_X\!\l(U\r)$ and $\pi^{-1}_Y\!\l(V\r)$ for $U\in\mc{T}_X$ and $V\in\mc{T}_Y$. ^product-space
* (<i>Quotient</i>). We equip a quotient $X/\!\sim$ with the topology by declaring $U\subseteq X/\!\sim$ to be open iff $p^{-1}\!\l(U\r)\subseteq X$ is open. If $A\subseteq X$ and $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $X$, the <i>saturation</i> of $A$ is $\l[A\r]\coloneqq\bigcup_{a\in A}\l[a\r]$. A subset $A\subseteq X$ is said to be <i>saturated</i> if $\l[A\r]=A$. ^quotient
    * A sufficient condition for the quotient $q:A\to A/\!\sim$ to be homeomorphic to $p:X\to X/\!\sim$ is that $\l[A\r]=X$ and, for all saturated open sets $U\subseteq A$, the set $\l[U\r]$ is open in $X$ too. Indeed, it follows from $\l[A\r]=X$ that the continuous natural map $\phi:A/\!\sim\,\to X/\!\sim$ is a bijection. A computation now shows that $p^{-1}\!\l(\phi\l(V\r)\r)=\l[q^{-1}\!\l(V\r)\r]$, so for every open set $V\subseteq A/\!\sim$, its image $\phi\l(V\r)\subseteq X/\!\sim$ is open too. Hence $\phi$ is a homeomorphism, as desired.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>
