---
mathLink-blocks:
    continuous-function: Continuous Function
    isomorphisms: Isomorphisms in $\cattop$
    product-space: Products in $\cattop$
    quotient: Quotients in $\cattop$
    subspace: Subobjects in $\cattop$
---

<div class="topSpace"></div>

Date Created: 23/01/2022 19:05:00
Tags: #Type/Definition #Topic/Topology

Types: [[Hausdorff Space]], [[Metric Space]], [[Compact Space]], [[Separable Space]], [[Connected Space]]
Examples: [[Order Space (Topology)]], [[Path]]
Constructions: [[Closure et al]], [[Sequential Limits]], [[Functional Limits]], [[Homotopy]], [[Covering Space]], [[Lift]], [[Mapping Cylinder]], [[Space of Continuous Functions]]
Generalizations: [[Homotopy Equivalence]]

Properties: [[Measurable Function#^continuous-implies-Borel]]
Sufficiencies: [[Basis and Subbasis]], [[Luzin's Theorem]]
Equivalences: <i>Not Applicable</i>
Justifications: [[Compact Space#^extreme-value-theorem]], [[Compact Space#^compact-hausdorff-implies-closed]]

``` ad-Definition
title: Definition.

Let $X$ be a set. A <b>topology on $X$</b> is a family $\mc{T}\subseteq\pow\l(X\r)$ of <b>open sets</b> containing $\em$ and $X$ and is closed under (arbitrary) unions and finite intersections. The pair $\tpl{X,\mc{T}}$ is called a <b>topological space</b>.
* A function $f:X\to Y$ is said to be <b>continuous</b> if preimages of open sets are open.
* The <b>category of topological spaces</b> is the category $\cattop$ whose objects are topological spaces and whose morphisms are continuous functions.

```

<b>Remark.</b> A sufficient criterion for a subset $U\subseteq X$ to be open is if every $x\in U$ admits an open set $U_x\ni x$ such that $U_x\subseteq U$. Indeed, we have $U=\bigcup_{x\in X}U_x$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<b>Remark.</b> Some elementary remarks about continuous functions. ^continuous-function
* A function is continuous iff it is continuous at each point $p\in X$; that is, every neighborhood $V$ of $f\l(p\r)$ admits a neighborhood $U$ of $p$ such that $f\l(U\r)\subseteq V$. Indeed, if $f$ is continuous, then $f^{-1}\!\l(V\r)$ is a neighborhood of $p$ with $f\l(f^{-1}\!\l(V\r)\r)\subseteq V$. Conversely, let $V$ be a neighborhood of $f\l(p\r)$, so there exists a neighborhood $U_p$ of $p$ such that $f\l(U_p\r)\subseteq V$. We claim that $f^{-1}\!\l(V\r)=\bigcup_{p\in X}U_p$, so it is open. The forward direction follows immediately since $p\in U_p$. The backwards direction is also clear, for $U_p\subseteq f^{-1}\!\l(f\l(U_p\r)\r)\subseteq f^{-1}\l(V\r)$.
* If $f:X\to Y$ is continuous and $\tpl{x_n}$ is a sequence converging to some $x\in X$, then the sequence $\tpl{f\l(x_n\r)}$ converges to $f\l(x\r)$. Indeed, let $U\ni f\l(x\r)$ be open, so $f^{-1}\!\l(U\r)\ni x$ is open. Since $x_n\to x$, there is some $N\in\N$ such that $x_n\in f^{-1}\!\l(U\r)$ for all $n\geq N$, so $f\l(x_n\r)\in f\l(f^{-1}\!\l(U\r)\r)\subseteq U$ eventually. The converse does <i>not</i> hold in general topological spaces.
* If $\mc{B}$ is a basis for the topology on $Y$, then it suffices to show that preimages of basic open sets are open. Indeed, every open set $V$ in $Y$ can be written as a union $V=\bigcup_{\alpha\in\mc{A}}B_\alpha$ for some basic open sets $B_\alpha\in\mc{B}$, so $f^{-1}\!\l(V\r)=f^{-1}\!\l(\bigcup_{\alpha\in\mc{A}}B_\alpha\r)=\bigcup_{\alpha\in\mc{A}}f^{-1}\!\l(B_\alpha\r)$. If furthermore $\mc{S}$ is a subbasis for the topology on $Y$, then every basic open set $B\in\mc{B}$ can be written as an intersection $B=\bigcap_{i=1}^{n}S_i$, so $f^{-1}\!\l(B\r)=\bigcap_{i=1}^{n}f^{-1}\!\l(S_i\r)$.
* A function $f:X\to Y$ is continuous iff preimages of closed sets are closed. This is clear by noting that $f^{-1}\l(V^c\r)^c=f^{-1}\!\l(V\r)$ for all $V\subseteq Y$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<b>Remark.</b> Some categorical remarks and constructions.
* The isomorphisms in $\cattop$ are continuous bijections whose inverses is also continuous. Note that the second condition is necessary; for instance, $\exp:\l[0,1\r)\to S^1$ is a continuous bijection whose inverse is <i>not</i> continuous. A sufficient condition for a continuous bijection $f:X\to Y$ to have a continuous inverse is that $X$ is compact and $Y$ is Hausdorff, in which case every closed set $F\subseteq X$ is compact, so $f\l(F\r)$ is compact and hence closed too. ^isomorphisms

The category of $\cattop$ admit subobjects, quotients, products, and coproducts.
* (<i>Subspace</i>). We equip a subset $S\subseteq X$ with the topology whose open sets are of the form $U\cap S$ for some open set $U$ of $X$. If $\mc{B}$ is a basis for the topology on $X$, then the subspace topology contains open sets of the form $B\cap S$ for $B\in\mc{B}$ instead. Similarly for subbasis. ^subspace
* (<i>Product</i>). We equip the product $X\times Y$ with the topology generated by the basis $\mc{B}\coloneqq\l\{U\times V\st U\in\mc{T}_X,V\in\mc{T}_Y\r\}$. If $\mc{B}_X$ and $\mc{B}_Y$ are bases for $\mc{T}_X$ and $\mc{T}_y$, then we may take $U\in\mc{B}_X$ and $V\in\mc{B}_Y$ instead. The product topology also admits a subbasis of all sets of the form $\pi^{-1}_X\!\l(U\r)$ and $\pi^{-1}_Y\!\l(V\r)$ for $U\in\mc{T}_X$ and $V\in\mc{T}_Y$. ^product-space
* (<i>Quotient</i>). We equip a quotient $X/\!\sim$ with the topology by declaring $U\subseteq X/\!\sim$ to be open iff $p^{-1}\!\l(U\r)\subseteq X$ is open. If $A\subseteq X$ and $\sim$ is an equivalence relation on $X$, the <i>saturation</i> of $A$ is $\Sat\l(A\r)\coloneqq\l\{x\in X\st\ex a\in A:x\sim a\r\}$. A subset $A\subseteq X$ is said to be <i>saturated</i> if $\Sat\l(A\r)=A$. ^quotient
    * A sufficient condition for the quotient $q:A\to A/\!\sim$ to be homeomorphic to $p:X\to X/\!\sim$ is that $\Sat\l(A\r)=X$ and, for all saturated open sets $U\subseteq A$, the set $\Sat\l(U\r)$ is open in $X$ too. Indeed, it follows from $\Sat\l(A\r)=X$ that the continuous natural map $\phi:A/\!\sim\,\to X/\!\sim$ is a bijection. A computation now shows that $p^{-1}\!\l(\phi\l(V\r)\r)=\Sat\l(q^{-1}\!\l(V\r)\r)$, so for every open set $V\subseteq A/\!\sim$, its image $\phi\l(V\r)\subseteq X/\!\sim$ is open too. Hence $\phi$ is a homeomorphism, as desired.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<b>Remark.</b> Instead of a topology $\mc{T}$ on $X$, we may equivalently consider a family $\mc{F}\subseteq\pow\l(X\r)$ containing $\em$ and $X$, whose elements are called <i>closed sets</i>, but is now closed under (arbitrary) intersections and finite unions instead. Every topology induces a family of closed sets and vice-versa.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>

---

<b>Remark.</b> The collection of all topologies on $X$ forms a lattice under $\subseteq$. If $\mc{T}_1\subseteq\mc{T}_2$ are topologies on $X$, then $\mc{T}_2$ is <i>finer</i> than $\mc{T}_1$ and $\mc{T}_1$ is <i>coarser</i> than $\mc{T}_2$.
* If $\mc{B}_1$ and $\mc{B}_2$ are respective bases for the topologies $\mc{T}_1$ and $\mc{T}_2$, then $\mc{T}_2$ is finer than $\mc{T}_1$ iff for each $x\in X$ and each $B_1\in\mc{B}_1$ containing $x$, there is a basis element $B_2\in\mc{B}_2$ such that $x\in B_2\subseteq B_1$.<span style="float:right;">$\blacklozenge$</span>
