---
title: 'Topological Space'
date: 2024-05-14T14:45:50-04:00
references: []
tags: ['Topic/Topology']
---

Let $X$ be a set. We would like to formalize a notion of ‘closeness’ between two points without necessarily referring to a specific {{< link file="metric_space" display="metric" type="prerequisites" >}}, but rather, via certain subsets of $X$ called *open sets*. The following definition is motivated by some properties {{< link file="metric_space_generates_a_topology" type="justifications" mod="dag" >}} of open sets generated by a metric $d$ on $X$, which we now axiomatize.

{{< env "definition" >}}

Let $X$ be a set. A **topology** on $X$ is a family $\mc{T}\subseteq\pow(X)$, whose elements are called **open sets**, subject to the following conditions.
1. <span style="color:gray">(Non-trivial).</span> $\em$ and $X$ are in $\mc{T}$.
2. <span style="color:gray">(Closure under $\cup$).</span> For any $\mc{U}\subseteq\mc{T}$, we have $\bigcup\mc{U}\in\mc{T}$.
3. <span style="color:gray">(Closure under finite $\cap$).</span> For any $U_1,U_2\in\mc{T}$, we have $U_1\cap U_2\in\mc{T}$.

If $\mc{T}$ is a topology on $X$, we call the pair $\tpl{X,\mc{T}}$ a **topological space**.

{{< /env >}}

Similarly, continuity of functions between metric spaces {{< link file="continuous_function_metric" type="justifications" mod="dag" >}} motivative the following

{{< env "definition" >}}

A function $f:X\to Y$ between topological spaces is **continuous** if for any open subset $V\subseteq Y$, its preimage $f^{-1}(V)\subseteq X$ is open too.

{{< /env >}}

With continuous functions as morphisms, topological spaces form a {{< link file="category" display="category" type="prerequisites" >}}, which we denote by $\cattop$. By convention, isomorphisms in $\cattop$ are called *homeomorphisms*, which are not {{< link file="continuous_bijection_homeomorphism" type="justifications" mod="dag" >}} merely bijective continuous functions.

&emsp;&emsp;Very broadly speaking, the goal of topology is to find characterizing invariants (i.e. a list of properties such that $X\iso Y$ iff they satisfy the same properties), but this is too hard in general. Indeed, the entire field of {{< link file="algebraic_topology" display="algebraic topology" type="sufficiencies" >}} is devoted to finding algebraic invariants (and computing them). We thus restrict our attention to subcategories thereof.
* {{< link file="separation_axiom" display="Hausdorff" type="types" >}} spaces, or more generally $T_0$ (or $T_1$, etc$\dots$) spaces, exclude a lot of pathologies present in general topological spaces.
* {{< link file="compact_space" display="Compact" type="types" >}} spaces exhibit many properties of finite sets, and are therefore really nice to work with.
* {{< link file="connected_space" display="Connectedness" type="types" >}} and other related concepts like {{< link file="path-connected_space" display="path-connectedness" type="types" >}} help establish global properties of topological spaces.
* {{< link file="separable_space" display="Separable" type="types" >}} and {{< link file="first_countable_space" display="$1^\textrm{st}$" type="types" >}}/{{< link file="second_countable_space" display="$2^\textrm{nd}$" type="types" mod="space" >}} countable spaces are countable objects (in flavour), giving way to techniques from analysis.
* {{< link file="sequential_space" display="Sequential" type="types" >}} spaces allow topological properties (like convergence, continuity, and compactness etc) to be probed by sequences, much like as in metric spaces.
